JOSS Paper (#73)
p2p-ld/numpydantic: paper/paper.md

---
title: "Numpydantic: Static and dynamic array constraint validation for data standards and working programmers"
date: 27 May 2026
authors:
  - name: Jonny L. Saunders
    affiliation: '1'
    orcid: "0000-0003-0545-5066"
  - name: Daniel Aharoni
    affiliation: '1'
affiliations:
  - index: 1
    name: University of California, Los Angeles. Department of Neurology.
    ror: "046rm7j60"
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> Numpydantic is a minimalistic Python package that provides abstract types and a syntax for specifying constraint n-dimensional arrays.

Author: Grammar error in the first line

Its constraints can both be validated at runtime and statically using mypy.
Rather than being bound to a single array framework,

> it is generic array specification with an extensible interface system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
numpydantic is a generic array specification with an extensible interface system
```

that currently supports numpy, hdf5, zarr, and video files.
When used with pydantic, its NDArray type provides support for composing multiple arrays into validating data models,
including generation of detailed JSON schema,
roundtrip serialization,
and lazy proxies for on-disk arrays.
A mypy plugin enriches standard array constructors with dtype and shape,
and extends the quality of life improvements from static type analysis to the world of array programming. 

> # Statement of need

Reviewer: It might be nice to have a sentence or 2 here that discussing this need within the scope of pydantic and numpy. Something that hits on the value of these packages but also identifies the gap they leave for array types which are central to scientific programming and analysis.

You already do this here but without placing it within the specific scope of the 2 packages that are in the numpydantic naming. I think people would expect to see something like this early on and it would also help solidly place this work within packages people are familiar with.

> # Statement of need

Reviewer: After reading the whole things, I came back here to say that I think you have the option here of pushing a little harder on why this is so important for science... especially through a package that you "don't have to think about". You already do this but I think you wouldn't be overstepping if you hammer it in a little bit more.

The shape and dtype of an n-dimensional array are an essential part of its definition as a type.

> Functions that can accept an array with any shape or dtype are the exception rather than the rule in scientific programming - 

Author: Awkward

arrays are rarely formless bundles of numbers, 

> they are "video frames," "timeseries," "training and testing data," etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they are "video frames," "time series," "training and testing data," etc.
```

but the implementation of those constraints often bind the abstract form of a schema to a concrete set of tools and serialization formats.
Researchers who work with n-dimensional arrays have a rich variety of static analysis tooling to assist with software development,
but still struggle with keeping track of the hundreds of intermediate array forms that flow through their code.

The need for numpydantic then has three major parts:
- Need to be able to statically annotate array constraints to check code correctness during development
- Need to be able to dynamically validate data against array constraints at runtime
- Need to be able to declare schemas for arrays that are decoupled from a single array backend.

# State of the field

Python's type annotation system has evolved dramatically since its introduction in python 3.5 in 2014 [@vanrossumPEP484Type2014, @pythonsoftwarefoundationTypingPEPs].
Typing arrays is still an evolving challenge, 
motivating basic changes to the type system like variadic generics for shape specifications in PEP 646 [@mendozaPEP646Variadic2020].

> Numpy introduced type annotations for its arrays in v1.20.0 in 2021 [@NumPy1200Release2021] from prior work in `numpy-stubs` [@NumpyNumpystubs2017], with steady improvements over time. Numpy's types allow specifying the number of dimensions and a dtype, but not common needs like explicit dimension sizes, size ranges, etc., and its constructors. Numpydantic extends previous work attempting to provide runtime-checkable type,

Author: also cite/mention the new numpy types package even tho its still a baby

> vendoring `nptyping` [@hagenaarsNptyping2019] and extending and updating its syntax for new features of the python type system. 

Author: Note that nptyping is unmaintained

Other array frameworks like Dask [@daskdevelopmentteamDaskLibraryDynamic2016]
and Zarr [@milesZarrdevelopersZarrpythonV2402020]
are either untyped or allow typing only for dtype.

> Dataclasses [@smithPEP557Data2017] and dataclass-like packages use type annotations to create intelligible data structures, an avenue to escape the wild free-for-all of passing around un-annotated `dict`s and classes.

Reviewer: All the other packages you discuss here have a similar form: First say what they do then say where the gap is... but this isn't done for Dataclasses.

Author: ah, yeah this is a bit tricky because i'm discussing dataclass-like-things but not the `dataclasses` module itself, this might be a subtle distinction to someone not awash in the python type system. will try and clarify.

> Pydantic [@colvinPydanticValidation2026] is the most widely used library in python for declaring runtime-validating dataclass-like models,

Author: Consistent capitalization

but it lacks builtin support for arrays.

The closest sibling to numpydantic is likely [pandera](https://pandera.readthedocs.io) [@bantilanPanderaStatisticalData2020],
which provides schemas for dataframes across multiple backends (and, recently, complex multi-arrays from [xarray](https://docs.xarray.dev)). 
We are not aware of other projects that provide array specifications and validation across multiple array backends[^contactus].

[^contactus]: If you maintain an array spec library for python, please contact us and we will add you to our documentation as related projects!

# Software design

Numpydantic is designed to be a dependency you don't have to think about -
it has two required dependencies, numpy and pydantic, which are already likely present in any package that wants to use it.

> It can be used with or without pydantic, its annotations can be used in existing code in the typing layer for functions and variables without modifying any code.

Author: Conjunction

Support for multiple array frameworks is implemented as a set of [interface classes](https://numpydantic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/interfaces.html),
where each framework overrides the methods needed to match input to an interface,
extract shape and dtype,
serialize and deserialize json,
among other features.

## Pydantic Models

At its simplest, numpydantic does this:

```python
import numpy as np
from pydantic import BaseModel
from numpydantic import NDArray, Shape

class MyModel(BaseModel):
    array: NDArray[Shape["* x, * y, 3 rgb, * t"], np.uint8]
    
# numpy
MyModel(array=np.zeros((1080, 1920, 3, 100), dtype=np.uint8))
# dask

> MyModel(array=dask.array.zeros((3, 4, 5), dtype=np.uint8))

Author: Consistent shapes lmao

MyModel(array=('data.h5', '/nested/dataset'))
# zarr arrays
MyModel(array=zarr.zeros((3,4,5), dtype=np.uint8))
MyModel(array=('data.zarr', '/nested/dataset'))
# video files
MyModel(array="data.mp4")
```

When used in pydantic models, numpydantic provides runtime validation for array specifications,
as well as access to on-disk arrays by reference as in the HDF5, zarr, and video examples above.

By default, an array from any supported array backend can be used (as long as it matches the specification),
but an explicit array backend can be specified using an annotated type

```python
class MyModel(BaseModel):
    array: Annotated[np.ndarray, NDArraySchema(Shape(1, 2, 3), np.uint8)]
```

Numpydantic constructs a valid JSON schema for its annotations,
making them portable across languages,
and usable to accept array data via web APIs via, e.g. [fastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/).
For a simple example, for a `float16` array whose first dimension is length 1,
the second can be between 2 and 5, the following JSON schema is produced (abbreviated for clarity):

```python
class MyModel(BaseModel):
    array: NDArray[Shape[1, "2-5"], np.float16]
MyModel.model_json_schema()
```

```json

> {"properties": {"array": {

Author: Probably show the recursive example or not at all

Reviewer: Are you suggesting to not show the json example at all if it isn't recursive? Cause I really like this as a simple, clear example of the mapping between numpydantic python and json structures.

Author: Good feedback, I wasn't sure if this would be useful, but if it is I'll leave as is because the recursive example is a step change more complex

  "dtype": "numpy.float16",
  "items": {
    "items": {
      "maximum": 65504.0,
      "minimum": -65504.0,
      "type": "integer"
    },
    "maxItems": 5,
    "minItems": 2,
    "type": "array"
  },
  "maxItems": 1,
  "minItems": 1,
  "type": "array"
}}}
```

Numpydantic supports roundtripping array data to and from JSON,
including any metadata needed to reconstruct an array,

> and allowing on-disk arrays to be dumped as a reference rather than loading and serializing the whole array.

Author: Expand probs, show an example from nwb-linkml

## Standalone Use

Numpydantic can be used without pydantic to annotate normal functions and classes!

```python
def some_analysis(array: NDArray[Shape[1, 2, 3]]) -> NDArray[Shape[2, 4, 6]]:
    ...
```

These annotations can also be validated at runtime using a tool like [beartype](https://beartype.readthedocs.io/) [@curryBeartypeBeartype2020].

It can also be used as a runtime type for instance checking,
as well as ad-hoc validation

```python
>>> Grayscale = NDArray[Shape["*", "*"], np.uint8]
>>> array = np.zeros((100, 100), np.uint8)
>>> isinstance(np.zeros((100, 100), np.uint8), Grayscale)
True
>>> isinstance(np.zeros((100,)), Grayscale)
False
>>> Grayscale(np.zeros((100,), np.uint8))
ShapeError: Invalid shape! expected shape ['*', '*'], got shape (100,)

> ```

Reviewer: This is a nice example.

Reviewer: Can you also show what happens if the dtype doesn't match NDArray's expectation?

### Mypy plugin

A mypy plugin supports static analysis of numpydantic's specification syntax,
enriching array constructors with shape and dtype information
for any supported array backend.

```python
reveal_type(np.zeros((3, 4, 5), dtype=np.uint8))
reveal_type(zarr.zeros((3, 4, 5), another=int, dtype=np.uint8))
```

Without the plugin:

```
Revealed type is "numpy.ndarray[tuple[int, int, int], numpy.uint8]"
Revealed type is "Any"
```

With the plugin:

```
Revealed type is "numpy.ndarray[tuple[Literal[3], Literal[4], Literal[5]], numpy.uint8]"
Revealed type is "numpy.ndarray[tuple[Literal[3], Literal[4], Literal[5]], numpy.uint8]"
```

> By annotating analysis and i/o functions with correct type information,

Author: A quick note on how the plugin also validates the rest of the stuff

researchers can avoid tedious bugs from misshaped or typed arrays,
and use the runtime types for systematic validation without boilerplate.

# Research impact statement

Numpydantic was developed as part of the design of [LinkML arrays](https://linkml.io/linkml/schemas/arrays.html) [@moxonLinkMLOpenData2026].
Briefly, LinkML is an accessible, expressive schema language that allows a schema defined once to be translated into a number of schema and programming languages like OWL, JSON Schema, SQL DDL, etc. 
LinkML is widely used for linked data schemas and ontologies,
and is increasingly a target for adoption for scientific data formats.
Support for n-dimensional arrays is a critical part of using LinkML for scientific data,
and numpydantic is the core implementation for LinkML in Python.

> Numpydantic was also developed as part of an effort to rearchitect Neurodata Without Borders (NWB) [@rubelNeurodataBordersEcosystem2022].

Author: Link the repo

NWB uses HDMF [@trittHDMFHierarchicalData2019] as its schema language,
which was developed out of necessity,
as most schema languages do not support array specifications.
HDMF and NWB are both tightly coupled to HDF5 as a serialization format,
which makes metadata indexing and partial use of large datasets extraordinarily costly - 
to check a single scalar metadata attribute,
one needs to download the entire dataset,
which for neuroscientific data often means hundreds of gigabytes.
With NWB backed by linkml arrays and numpydantic
the specification becomes decoupled from the serialization format,
allowing array backends to be freely swapped among any supported by numpydantic,

> and separating lightweight metadata from heavier raw array data.

Reviewer: Very cool

Author: added an example of this in the draft i'm pushing in a sec

By decoupling schema, programmatic APIs, and serialization formats
with LinkML as a *lingua franca,* we are working towards a true ecosystem of FAIR data [@wilkinsonFAIRGuidingPrinciples2016]
where data standards only need to define the schema layer and get the rest for free.

> 

Author: Quick note on how type annotations are super useful for regular work-a-day scientists and how cheap array models in pydantic are gr8 for scripty everyday code

  like chunking, memory order, and so on.
  There is not a strong demand for these features yet,
  but when there is we will implement them.
- Support for TypeVars that can indicate that a given axis can be any size,
  but all shapes within a given scope must be the same size is important
  for many scientific applications 
  (e.g. a timestamps array must be the same length as some video array).
  We are [actively working on this](https://github.com/p2p-ld/numpydantic/issues/70)
  both in our mypy plugin as well as [upstream in mypy itself](https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/3345#issuecomment-4664544812)

# AI usage disclosure

No "AI" or LLMs were used at any time during development, nor to produce any part of this submission.

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Ryan Ly, Chris Mungall, Oliver Rübel, Wouter-Michiel Vierdag, and Ben Dichter for co-designing the LinkML Arrays specification
which gave shape to the initial spec; 
to Antônio Camargo for setting up the conda forge feedstock;
to all co-contributors past and present;
and to Rumbly Tumbly Lawnmower for being the light of my life and keeping my lap warm as I worked.

> 

Reviewer: Can you add a funding section and list the NIH Director's New Innovator Award, DP2MH129986. 

This is what funded your salary and this work is in line with the overall goals of our DP2.

Author: thanks i can never remember which one to put
